This fork contains a few changes from the original allowing it to be used 
not only for files but to get direct access to raw disk.

**IMPORTANT:** use an empty separate physical disk for experiments.

# Java Direct I/O (Jaydio)


Jaydio is a Java library for giving the programmer finer control over file I/O,
in part by bypassing the OS buffer cache. **For now, only Linux is supported**.
Jaydio serves as as a starting point for asynchronous / non-blocking direct
I/O, custom file page caching layers, and even advanced cache replacement
policies like [ARC](http://dbs.uni-leipzig.de/file/ARC.pdf) or
[2Q](http://www.inf.fu-berlin.de/lehre/WS06/DBS-Tech/Reader/2QBufferManagement.pdf).
Currently, it is useful for preventing the operating system from evicting
memory pages which need to stay "warm" in favor of non-critical file pages.



Adding Jaydio to Your Project
-----------------------------

[jaydio-0.1.jar](https://oss.sonatype.org/service/local/repositories/releases/content/net/smacke/jaydio/0.1/jaydio-0.1.jar)

Jaydio has dependencies on [JNA](https://github.com/twall/jna) and [SLF4J](http://www.slf4j.org/).

Maven dependency

```xml
  <dependency>
    <groupId>net.smacke</groupId>
    <artifactId>jaydio</artifactId>
    <version>0.1</version>
  </dependency>
```

The API reference for Jaydio is located in the
[javadoc](http://smacke.net/jaydio/javadoc/index.html).

How it works
------------

Jaydio works by passing the `O_DIRECT` flag to the Linux `open()` system call.
Unfortunately, talking directly to disk imposes some nasty rules about how many
bytes can be written at a time, and where they can be written. In particular,
all writes must be in multiples of the file system block size, and they must
originate from chunks of memory aligned to the memory page size, and they must
also occur at file system block boundaries.  see `man 2 open` (search for
`O_DIRECT`) and `man 3 posix_memalign` for more details.

Fortunately, with Jaydio you don't have to worry about any of that. All of the
nasty alignment rule parameters are determined on-the-fly, so that native libc
file reads and writes may be used to bypass the OS cache. Jaydio uses
[JNA](https://github.com/twall/jna/) to accomplish all this parameter querying
and other native magic.

Example
-------

```java
int bufferSize = 1<<23; // Use 8 MiB buffers
byte[] buf = new byte[bufferSize];

DirectRandomAccessFile fin = 
        new DirectRandomAccessFile(new File("hello.txt"), "r", bufferSize);

DirectRandomAccessFile fout =
        new DirectRandomAccessFile(new File("world.txt"), "rw", bufferSize);

while (fin.getFilePointer() < fin.length()) {
    int remaining = (int)Math.min(bufferSize, fin.length()-fin.getFilePointer());
    fin.read(buf,0,remaining);
    fout.write(buf,0,remaining);
}

fin.close();
fout.close();
```

FAQ
===

#### Does it work?

Here is a plot of memory use on my system during a copy of a 1.4 GB file, under
different scenarios. The first scenario (red) corresponds to having plenty of
memory free (about 2.6 GB) **at the start of the copy**, so that, if need be,
we could basically fit two copies of file in memory. The second scenario
(blue), my system has limited memory available (about 900 MB) when copying
begins. The third scenario (green), we use Jaydio for the file copy (yay!),
with buffers totaling about 36 MiB.  For each scenario, completion of the copy
is indicated by a vertical dotted line.

![File copy comparison plot](https://raw.github.com/smacke/jaydio/gh-pages/jaydio-cp-plot.png)

As you can see, Jaydio successfully bypasses the OS buffer cache, and uses no
memory other than the small buffers allocated to it.  Interestingly enough, for
scenario 2 (blue, RAM limited), we're only taking marginally less time than
direct I/O for the copy! This is likely because we ran out of RAM early on, and
so are effecively doing direct I/O at the point where the blue curve flatlines,
as we need to free up space in the cache whenever we do a write.

Jaydio takes about 41 seconds to do the copy, RAM-limited `cp` takes about 40.5
seconds, and RAM-abundant `cp` takes about 26.8 seconds on my system, for a 1.4
GB file.

#### Why bypass file system cache? Isn't it there for a reason?

Yes, and in 99% of cases you will want to use it. As mentioned earlier, Jaydio
serves as a starting point for implementing more advanced cache replacement
policies than LRU, but there are also times when you want to prevent the
operating system from evicting certain memory pages in favor of caching files.


#### Can't I just use something like `DONTNEED` or `NOREUSE` with `posix_fadvise` or `madvise` if I'm worried about that page cache stomping over useful memory pages?

As far as I know, `NOREUSE` is a no-op.

You could use `DONTNEED`, and you would likely see better performance (in terms
of raw speed), too. Unfortunately, this sort of strategy does not discriminate
between cached pages that you want to save and those that you want to write
back to disk, if, say, the same file has been opened by multiple threads, of
differing priorities regarding memory accesses.
[Here](http://blog.mikemccandless.com/2010/06/lucene-and-fadvisemadvise.html)
is one example of a situation where this sort of strategy will not work.


#### I'm on Linux, but when I try to create a Jaydio `DirectRandomAccessFile` I get "Error opening file, got Invalid argument". What gives?

This is the very uninformative libc error that you get when something goes
wrong when opening a file. Chances are that your file system does not support
opening files with the `O_DIRECT` flag. For example, if you encrypt your home
directory using a file system like ecryptfs, you can't use direct I/O there.


Contributing
============

Any contribution, whether it be a bug report or new core functionality, is
welcome. Please feel free to fork and send pull requests! That being said,
contributions which include unit tests are preferred.

Once you have cloned the source, one of the easier ways to get set up is with
eclipse, especially if you have the [m2eclipse](https://www.eclipse.org/m2e/)
plugin. Just go to "File -> New -> Project -> Maven Project" and point the root
directory to wherever you cloned Jaydio.

If you don't have `m2eclipse`, you can still set things up easily if you run
`mvn eclipse:eclipse` wherever you cloned Jaydio to set up `.project` and
`.classpath` files for eclipse. From eclipse, then do "File -> New -> Java
Project" and point the root project directory to the Jaydio directory.

Lastly, if you find some use for Jaydio, one excellent way to contribute is to
shoot me an email describing what you're doing -- I'd love to hear about it!

License
=======

This library is released under the Apache Software License, version 2.0.
